---
title: Random notes on SSL and RSA
category: cryptography
mathjax: true
---

I had almost zero knowledge of SSL and RSA until one day I realized that I might
have to write a simple proxy. The reason, although later proved to be wrong, was
that my company proxy used a basic authentication scheme, which I could not make
it work along with JVM. I was trying to setup a Scala develop environment but
stuck there. Eventually, I figured out that I just needed to disable NTLM for
JVM, which is simply a command option rather than writing a proxy. Anyway, I
still write down some notes I learned during the course, just for my own
reference. Additionally, the proxy almost works as expected, from which I also
learned some socket programming.

SSL hanshake procedure
- Client Hello: includes the session ID, cipher suites
supported by the clients, and various extensions, such as the server name.
- Server Hello: includes the assigned session ID (if not reconnecting), chosen
cipher suite, and certificate.
- Alter: in the case that anything goes wrong, e.g., untrusted certificate.

Certificate
- Subject: the server identified in the certificate.
- Issuer: the CA that signs the certificate.
- Extension -> AuthorityKeyIdentifier: should match the SubjectKeyIdentifier in
  the next certificate that signs the current one.

Certificate chain
- Suppose A -> B is a partial chain. The certificate A is signed by the
  private-key of B, and therefore can be verified by the public-key of B.
- The validation procedure goes from the end-entity, i.e., the certificate whose
  subject is our targeted server, and verifies that each certificate by its
  successor's public-key. If we can reach the root certificate, which is
  self-signed, the procedure succeeds.

RSA
- Euler's totient function: $$\phi(n) = \textsf{# of positive integers}$$ that
  are smaller than $$n$$ and coprime with $$n$$.
- Euler's theorem: for any $$a$$ and $$n$$ where $$\textsf{gcd}(a, n) = 1$$,
  $$a^{\phi(n)} \equiv 1\text{  }(\textsf{mod }n)$$.
- RSA theorem: for primes $$p$$ and $$q$$, $$a^{(p-1)(q-1)} \equiv 1\text{  }
  (\textsf{mod }pq)$$.
- Procedure
  1. Pick $$p$$ and $$q$$, let $$n = pq$$ and $$\phi = (p-1)(q-1)$$. Discard
  $$p$$ and $$q$$ then.
  2. Pick $$e$$ and $$d$$, so that $$ed \equiv 1\text{ }(\textsf{mod
  }\phi)$$. The pair $$(e, n)$$ is the public key, where $$e$$ is called the
  exponent and $$n$$ is called the modulus. The pair $$(d, n)$$ is the private
  key.
  3. To encrypt, convert the message into an integer $$m < n$$, and then compute
  $$c \equiv m^e\text{ }(\textsf{mod }n)$$. The number $$m$$ should also be
  coprime with $$n$$. Since $$n = pq$$, the number of positive integers that are
  not coprime with $$n$$ equals to $$p + q - 1$$ ($$\phi(pq) = \phi(p)\phi(q)$$,
  for $$p$$ and $$q$$ that $$\textsf{gcd}(p, q) = 1$$). Therefore, almost all
  the number less than $$n$$ are coprime with $$n$$ as $$n$$ goes large.
  4. To decrypt, raise $$c$$ to $$c^d$$. It can be shown that $$c^d \equiv
  m\text{ }(\textsf{mod }n)$$, which gives back the original message.
- Note that $$e$$ and $$d$$ are "symmetric" in the sense that you can either
  encrypt with $$e$$ or $$d$$, and decrypt with the other.
- It does not matter how we choose $$d$$ as long as $$ed$$ is in the desired
  equivalence group. Also, it is not necessary to know the exact $$d$$ one had
  chosen for the same reason. One can decrypt even with a different $$d$$ as
  long as $$ed \equiv 1\text{ }(\textsf{mod }\phi)$$.

Practical usage
- To install root certificate under Ubuntu, first copy the certificate to
  `/usr/share/ca-certificates`. Then do `dpkg-reconfigure ca-certificates` to
  update `/etc/ca-certificates.conf` and `/etc/ssl/certs`.
- To verify a certificate, use `openssl verify`.